analysis/COMPRESSION_EVENT_DETECTION.md, before:

# Compression-Based Event Detection for DAS Data

## Executive Summary

**Discovery**: Compression ratio serves as an excellent real-time proxy for detecting interesting seismic/acoustic events in DAS data, enabling **62-86% bandwidth savings** while capturing the most scientifically valuable data.

## Hypothesis

Files with compression ratios outside the typical ~8 and ~14 ranges may contain more interesting event data (seismic events, vessel activity, marine phenomena) worth prioritizing for limited-bandwidth transmission.

## Validation Results

### ✓ HYPOTHESIS STRONGLY SUPPORTED

Statistical analysis of 906 DAS files demonstrates:

| Metric                 | Anomalous Files | Normal Files | Ratio    | Significance         |
| ---------------------- | --------------- | ------------ | -------- | -------------------- |
| **Standard Deviation** | 5.74            | 2.16         | **2.6x** | p < 0.000001, d=1.24 |
| **Dynamic Range**      | 72.3            | 34.6         | **2.1x** | p < 0.000001, d=1.38 |
| **Absolute Range**     | 160.1           | 86.1         | **1.9x** | p < 0.000001, d=1.49 |
| **Signal Complexity**  | 0.91            | 0.27         | **3.4x** | p < 0.000001, d=1.38 |

_All differences are highly statistically significant with large effect sizes (Cohen's d > 1.2)_

## Data Categories

### Anomaly Low (<7 compression ratio) - 13.1% of files

- **Characteristics**: Highest signal variability, largest dynamic range
- **Interpretation**: Complex signals - likely seismic events, strong vessel signatures, or turbulent flow
- **Action**: **HIGH PRIORITY** - Always transmit

### Anomaly Mid (9-13 compression ratio) - 0.4% of files

- **Characteristics**: Intermediate complexity
- **Interpretation**: Transitional states or moderate events
- **Action**: **MEDIUM PRIORITY** - Transmit

### Normal Low (~8 compression ratio) - 48.0% of files

- **Characteristics**: Baseline ambient noise with some structure
- **Interpretation**: Standard oceanic background, vessel traffic at distance
- **Action**: Sample 10-25% for baseline monitoring

### Normal High (~14 compression ratio) - 38.4% of files

- **Characteristics**: Low variability, highly compressible
- **Interpretation**: Quiet periods, minimal activity
- **Action**: Sample 10-25% for baseline monitoring

## Transmission Strategies

### Strategy 1: Aggressive Filtering ⚡

**Transmit only anomalous compression files (< 7 or 9-13)**

- Files: 123 / 906 (13.6%)
- **Bandwidth savings: 86.4%**
- Risk: May miss some events in "normal" range
- Use case: Severe bandwidth constraints

### Strategy 2: Conservative Filtering ⭐ RECOMMENDED

**Transmit anomalous + 25% random sample of normal**

- Files: ~342 / 906 (37.7%)
- **Bandwidth savings: 62.3%**
- Ensures event capture + baseline monitoring
- Provides ground truth for validation
- Use case: Standard operations

### Strategy 3: Moderate Filtering

**Transmit anomalous + 10% random sample of normal**

- Files: ~229 / 906 (25.3%)
- **Bandwidth savings: 74.7%**
- Minimal baseline sampling
- Use case: Moderate bandwidth constraints

## Implementation

### Real-Time Decision Algorithm

```python
import random

def should_transmit(compression_factor, std_dev=None):
    """
    Decide if a DAS file should be transmitted based on compression ratio.

    Args:
        compression_factor: Computed compression ratio after encoding
        std_dev: Optional standard deviation for secondary filtering

    Returns:
        tuple: (should_transmit: bool, priority: str)
    """
    # HIGH PRIORITY: Definite anomalies (hard to compress = complex signal)
    if compression_factor < 7.0:
        return True, 'PRIORITY_HIGH'

    # MEDIUM PRIORITY: Possible anomalies or borderline cases
    if 9.0 < compression_factor < 13.0:
        return True, 'PRIORITY_MEDIUM'

    # LOW PRIORITY: Sample normal data for baseline (25% sampling rate)
    if random.random() < 0.25:
        return True, 'PRIORITY_LOW'

    # SKIP: Normal, highly compressible data
    return False, 'SKIP'
```

### Integration Points

1. **After Compression**: Check compression ratio immediately after encoding
2. **Queue Management**: Prioritize transmission queue by category
3. **Bandwidth Adaptation**: Adjust sampling rate based on available bandwidth
4. **Metadata Logging**: Track all files (transmitted + skipped) for retrospective analysis

### Deployment Steps

1. **Pilot Test** (Week 1-2)

   - Deploy on single cable segment
   - Compare against transmitting all files
   - Validate event capture rate with domain experts

2. **Threshold Tuning** (Week 3-4)

   - Adjust compression thresholds based on feedback
   - Fine-tune sampling rates
   - Establish baseline metrics

3. **Production Rollout** (Month 2)
   - Deploy across all monitoring sites
   - Continuous monitoring and adjustment
   - Track bandwidth savings and event detection rate

## Feature Importance

Features correlated with low compression (interesting events):

| Feature                    | Correlation | Interpretation                            |
| -------------------------- | ----------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| Absolute Range             | -0.53       | Larger signal swings → harder to compress |
| Max Value                  | -0.52       | Higher peaks → harder to compress         |
| Dynamic Range (P99.9-P0.1) | -0.52       | Wider distribution → harder to compress   |
| Standard Deviation         | -0.51       | More variability → harder to compress     |

## Validation Metrics

Monitor these to ensure the approach is working:

1. **Event Detection Rate**: % of known events captured in transmitted data
2. **False Negative Rate**: Events missed in skipped files (periodic manual review)
3. **Compression Drift**: Track if compression ratios change over time (seasonality, equipment)
4. **Bandwidth Utilization**: Actual vs predicted transmission rates
5. **Scientific Value**: Feedback from researchers on data quality

## Files for Manual Inspection

Validate the hypothesis by manually reviewing these sample files:

### Anomaly Low (Should contain events)

- `160222.hdf5` - compression: 4.40, std: 11.25
- `160232.hdf5` - compression: 4.40, std: 11.28
- `161248.hdf5` - compression: 4.50, std: 9.72

### Normal Low (Baseline data)

- `155734.hdf5` - compression: 8.31, std: 3.24
- `165145.hdf5` - compression: 8.27, std: 1.56

### Normal High (Quiet periods)

- `162524.hdf5` - compression: 14.77, std: 1.49
- `170515.hdf5` - compression: 14.72, std: 1.22

## Analysis Scripts

Located in `analysis/artifacts/`:

1. **`compression_factor_histogram.py`** - Basic histogram of compression ratios
2. **`compression_anomaly_analysis.py`** - Statistical analysis and categorization
3. **`advanced_event_detection.py`** - Significance testing and recommendations
4. **`compression_event_analysis.ipynb`** - Interactive Jupyter notebook

## Output Files

### Reports

- `compression_anomaly_report.md` - Statistical analysis results
- `transmission_recommendations.md` - Actionable implementation guide

### Data Files

- `interesting_files.json` - Top files in each category
- `transmission_decision_matrix.json` - Threshold values and decision rules
- `transmission_priority_list.csv` - All files with priority assignments
- `priority_transmission_files.csv` - HIGH/MEDIUM priority files only
- `feature_importance.json` - Feature correlations

### Visualizations

- `compression_factor_histogram.png` - Distribution of compression ratios
- `compression_vs_properties.png` - Scatter plots of compression vs data properties
- `distribution_comparison.png` - Histograms by category
- `category_boxplots.png` - Statistical distributions
- `temporal_pattern.png` - Time series analysis

## Scientific Interpretation

### Why Does This Work?

Compression algorithms struggle with:

- **High entropy signals**: Random or unpredictable patterns
- **Broadband frequency content**: Multiple simultaneous sources
- **Transient events**: Sudden changes in signal characteristics
- **Non-stationary processes**: Time-varying statistics

These are exactly the characteristics of interesting oceanographic/seismic events:

- Earthquake arrivals
- Vessel passages at close range
- Landslides or other mass movements
- Biological activity (whale calls, fish schools)
- Ocean internal waves and turbulence

### What Gets Filtered Out?

Highly compressible data (compression ~14) typically represents:

- Ambient ocean noise
- Distant vessel traffic
- Steady-state environmental conditions
- Instrument self-noise

## Business Impact

### Cost Savings for Satellite Transmission

**Note**: These savings apply only if transmitting via satellite. Most submarine cables have fiber connectivity where bandwidth costs are much lower.

- **Satellite bandwidth**: \$500-2000/GB
- **Daily data volume**: ~500GB uncompressed
- **With 63% reduction**: Save ~$5,000-$31,000 per day per site
- **Annual savings per site**: $1.8M - $11M (satellite only)

### Operational Benefits

- **Faster event response**: Priority transmission of event data
- **Better resource allocation**: Focus analyst time on interesting data
- **Scalability**: Support more cable segments with same bandwidth
- **Adaptive system**: Can adjust sampling rate dynamically

## Future Work

1. **Multi-variate filtering**: Combine compression ratio with other metrics (kurtosis, spectral centroid)
2. **Machine learning**: Train classifier to predict event probability
3. **Adaptive thresholds**: Adjust based on seasonal patterns or known event types
4. **Edge processing**: Compute additional features (FFT, wavelet) on high-priority files
5. **Feedback loop**: Incorporate scientist annotations to refine filtering

## References

- Ocean Observatories Initiative: https://oceanobservatories.org/
- DAS Technology Overview: See `DAS_MARITIME_ARCHITECTURE.md`
- Information Theory Analysis: See `INFORMATION_THEORY_ANALYSIS.md`
- Compression Tools: See `daspack/` directory

## Contact

For questions about this analysis or collaboration opportunities, see business strategy document.

---

_Analysis conducted October 2025 on OOI DAS data from May 6, 2024_

Commit message:

Initial GitHub Pages microsite setup
- Added Jekyll configuration (_config.yml)
- Created responsive layout and CSS styling
- Added front matter to all markdown files
- Organized documentation structure
- Created navigation and index pages
- Added analysis section with comprehensive documentation
- Configured for GitHub Pages deployment

analysis/COMPRESSION_EVENT_DETECTION.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: "Compression-Based Event Detection for DAS Data"
description: "Complete technical analysis of compression ratio as a proxy for event detection in DAS maritime surveillance systems."
---

# Compression-Based Event Detection for DAS Data

## Executive Summary

**Discovery**: Compression ratio serves as an excellent real-time proxy for detecting interesting seismic/acoustic events in DAS data, enabling **62-86% bandwidth savings** while capturing the most scientifically valuable data.

## Hypothesis

Files with compression ratios outside the typical ~8 and ~14 ranges may contain more interesting event data (seismic events, vessel activity, marine phenomena) worth prioritizing for limited-bandwidth transmission.

## Validation Results

### ✓ HYPOTHESIS STRONGLY SUPPORTED

Statistical analysis of 906 DAS files demonstrates:

| Metric                 | Anomalous Files | Normal Files | Ratio    | Significance         |
| ---------------------- | --------------- | ------------ | -------- | -------------------- |
| **Standard Deviation** | 5.74            | 2.16         | **2.6x** | p < 0.000001, d=1.24 |
| **Dynamic Range**      | 72.3            | 34.6         | **2.1x** | p < 0.000001, d=1.38 |
| **Absolute Range**     | 160.1           | 86.1         | **1.9x** | p < 0.000001, d=1.49 |
| **Signal Complexity**  | 0.91            | 0.27         | **3.4x** | p < 0.000001, d=1.38 |

_All differences are highly statistically significant with large effect sizes (Cohen's d > 1.2)_

## Data Categories

### Anomaly Low (<7 compression ratio) - 13.1% of files

- **Characteristics**: Highest signal variability, largest dynamic range
- **Interpretation**: Complex signals - likely seismic events, strong vessel signatures, or turbulent flow
- **Action**: **HIGH PRIORITY** - Always transmit

### Anomaly Mid (9-13 compression ratio) - 0.4% of files

- **Characteristics**: Intermediate complexity
- **Interpretation**: Transitional states or moderate events
- **Action**: **MEDIUM PRIORITY** - Transmit

### Normal Low (~8 compression ratio) - 48.0% of files

- **Characteristics**: Baseline ambient noise with some structure
- **Interpretation**: Standard oceanic background, vessel traffic at distance
- **Action**: Sample 10-25% for baseline monitoring

### Normal High (~14 compression ratio) - 38.4% of files

- **Characteristics**: Low variability, highly compressible
- **Interpretation**: Quiet periods, minimal activity
- **Action**: Sample 10-25% for baseline monitoring

## Transmission Strategies

### Strategy 1: Aggressive Filtering ⚡

**Transmit only anomalous compression files (< 7 or 9-13)**

- Files: 123 / 906 (13.6%)
- **Bandwidth savings: 86.4%**
- Risk: May miss some events in "normal" range
- Use case: Severe bandwidth constraints

### Strategy 2: Conservative Filtering ⭐ RECOMMENDED

**Transmit anomalous + 25% random sample of normal**

- Files: ~342 / 906 (37.7%)
- **Bandwidth savings: 62.3%**
- Ensures event capture + baseline monitoring
- Provides ground truth for validation
- Use case: Standard operations

### Strategy 3: Moderate Filtering

**Transmit anomalous + 10% random sample of normal**

- Files: ~229 / 906 (25.3%)
- **Bandwidth savings: 74.7%**
- Minimal baseline sampling
- Use case: Moderate bandwidth constraints

## Implementation

### Real-Time Decision Algorithm

```python
import random

def should_transmit(compression_factor, std_dev=None):
    """
    Decide if a DAS file should be transmitted based on compression ratio.

    Args:
        compression_factor: Computed compression ratio after encoding
        std_dev: Optional standard deviation for secondary filtering

    Returns:
        tuple: (should_transmit: bool, priority: str)
    """
    # HIGH PRIORITY: Definite anomalies (hard to compress = complex signal)
    if compression_factor < 7.0:
        return True, 'PRIORITY_HIGH'

    # MEDIUM PRIORITY: Possible anomalies or borderline cases
    if 9.0 < compression_factor < 13.0:
        return True, 'PRIORITY_MEDIUM'

    # LOW PRIORITY: Sample normal data for baseline (25% sampling rate)
    if random.random() < 0.25:
        return True, 'PRIORITY_LOW'

    # SKIP: Normal, highly compressible data
    return False, 'SKIP'
```

### Integration Points

1. **After Compression**: Check compression ratio immediately after encoding
2. **Queue Management**: Prioritize transmission queue by category
3. **Bandwidth Adaptation**: Adjust sampling rate based on available bandwidth
4. **Metadata Logging**: Track all files (transmitted + skipped) for retrospective analysis

### Deployment Steps

1. **Pilot Test** (Week 1-2)

   - Deploy on single cable segment
   - Compare against transmitting all files
   - Validate event capture rate with domain experts

2. **Threshold Tuning** (Week 3-4)

   - Adjust compression thresholds based on feedback
   - Fine-tune sampling rates
   - Establish baseline metrics

3. **Production Rollout** (Month 2)
   - Deploy across all monitoring sites
   - Continuous monitoring and adjustment
   - Track bandwidth savings and event detection rate

## Feature Importance

Features correlated with low compression (interesting events):

| Feature                    | Correlation | Interpretation                            |
| -------------------------- | ----------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| Absolute Range             | -0.53       | Larger signal swings → harder to compress |
| Max Value                  | -0.52       | Higher peaks → harder to compress         |
| Dynamic Range (P99.9-P0.1) | -0.52       | Wider distribution → harder to compress   |
| Standard Deviation         | -0.51       | More variability → harder to compress     |

## Validation Metrics

Monitor these to ensure the approach is working:

1. **Event Detection Rate**: % of known events captured in transmitted data
2. **False Negative Rate**: Events missed in skipped files (periodic manual review)
3. **Compression Drift**: Track if compression ratios change over time (seasonality, equipment)
4. **Bandwidth Utilization**: Actual vs predicted transmission rates
5. **Scientific Value**: Feedback from researchers on data quality

## Files for Manual Inspection

Validate the hypothesis by manually reviewing these sample files:

### Anomaly Low (Should contain events)

- `160222.hdf5` - compression: 4.40, std: 11.25
- `160232.hdf5` - compression: 4.40, std: 11.28
- `161248.hdf5` - compression: 4.50, std: 9.72

### Normal Low (Baseline data)

- `155734.hdf5` - compression: 8.31, std: 3.24
- `165145.hdf5` - compression: 8.27, std: 1.56

### Normal High (Quiet periods)

- `162524.hdf5` - compression: 14.77, std: 1.49
- `170515.hdf5` - compression: 14.72, std: 1.22

## Analysis Scripts

Located in `analysis/artifacts/`:

1. **`compression_factor_histogram.py`** - Basic histogram of compression ratios
2. **`compression_anomaly_analysis.py`** - Statistical analysis and categorization
3. **`advanced_event_detection.py`** - Significance testing and recommendations
4. **`compression_event_analysis.ipynb`** - Interactive Jupyter notebook

## Output Files

### Reports

- `compression_anomaly_report.md` - Statistical analysis results
- `transmission_recommendations.md` - Actionable implementation guide

### Data Files

- `interesting_files.json` - Top files in each category
- `transmission_decision_matrix.json` - Threshold values and decision rules
- `transmission_priority_list.csv` - All files with priority assignments
- `priority_transmission_files.csv` - HIGH/MEDIUM priority files only
- `feature_importance.json` - Feature correlations

### Visualizations

- `compression_factor_histogram.png` - Distribution of compression ratios
- `compression_vs_properties.png` - Scatter plots of compression vs data properties
- `distribution_comparison.png` - Histograms by category
- `category_boxplots.png` - Statistical distributions
- `temporal_pattern.png` - Time series analysis

## Scientific Interpretation

### Why Does This Work?

Compression algorithms struggle with:

- **High entropy signals**: Random or unpredictable patterns
- **Broadband frequency content**: Multiple simultaneous sources
- **Transient events**: Sudden changes in signal characteristics
- **Non-stationary processes**: Time-varying statistics

These are exactly the characteristics of interesting oceanographic/seismic events:

- Earthquake arrivals
- Vessel passages at close range
- Landslides or other mass movements
- Biological activity (whale calls, fish schools)
- Ocean internal waves and turbulence

### What Gets Filtered Out?

Highly compressible data (compression ~14) typically represents:

- Ambient ocean noise
- Distant vessel traffic
- Steady-state environmental conditions
- Instrument self-noise

## Business Impact

### Cost Savings for Satellite Transmission

**Note**: These savings apply only if transmitting via satellite. Most submarine cables have fiber connectivity where bandwidth costs are much lower.

- **Satellite bandwidth**: \$500-2000/GB
- **Daily data volume**: ~500GB uncompressed
- **With 63% reduction**: Save ~$5,000-$31,000 per day per site
- **Annual savings per site**: $1.8M - $11M (satellite only)

### Operational Benefits

- **Faster event response**: Priority transmission of event data
- **Better resource allocation**: Focus analyst time on interesting data
- **Scalability**: Support more cable segments with same bandwidth
- **Adaptive system**: Can adjust sampling rate dynamically

## Future Work

1. **Multi-variate filtering**: Combine compression ratio with other metrics (kurtosis, spectral centroid)
2. **Machine learning**: Train classifier to predict event probability
3. **Adaptive thresholds**: Adjust based on seasonal patterns or known event types
4. **Edge processing**: Compute additional features (FFT, wavelet) on high-priority files
5. **Feedback loop**: Incorporate scientist annotations to refine filtering

## References

- Ocean Observatories Initiative: https://oceanobservatories.org/
- DAS Technology Overview: See `DAS_MARITIME_ARCHITECTURE.md`
- Information Theory Analysis: See `INFORMATION_THEORY_ANALYSIS.md`
- Compression Tools: See `daspack/` directory

## Contact

For questions about this analysis or collaboration opportunities, see business strategy document.

---

_Analysis conducted October 2025 on OOI DAS data from May 6, 2024_
